Overview of PyImfit
===================

PyImfit is a Python wrapper around the (C++-based) image-fitting program
`Imfit <https://www.mpe.mpg.de/~erwin/code/imfit>`__ (`Github
site <https://github.com/perwin/imfit>`__).

**Terminology:**

**Imfit** (boldface) refers to the C++ program (and the C++-based
library that PyImfit is built upon).

PyImfit is the general name for this Python package; ``pyimfit`` is the
official Python name (e.g., ``import pyimfit``).

Finally, ``Imfit`` refers to the ``pyimfit.Imfit`` class, which does
most of the work.

For Those Already Familiar with Imfit
-------------------------------------

If you’ve already used the command-line version of **Imfit**, here are
the essential things to know:

-  PyImfit operates on 2D NumPy arrays instead of FITS files; to use a
   FITS file, read it into Python via, e.g.,
   `astropy.io.fits <http://docs.astropy.org/en/stable/io/fits/>`__.

-  Models (and initial parameter values and parameter limits for a fit)
   are specified via the ModelDescription class. The utility function
   ``parse_config_file`` will read a standard **Imfit** configuration
   file and return an instance of that class with the model
   specification. You can also build up a ``ModelDescription`` instance
   by programmatically specifying components from within Python, or via
   a dict-based description.

-  PyImfit uses the same `column-major, 1-based
   indexing <./pixel_conventions.html>`__ as Imfit; thus, a function set
   with (Py)Imfit coordnates x0,y0 = 100,50 would have Python (NumPy)
   coordinates ``array[49,99]``

-  Fitting is done by instantiating an ``Imfit`` object with a
   ``ModelDescription`` object as input, then adding a 2D NumPy array as
   the data to be fit (along with, optionally, mask and error images,
   the image A/D gain value, etc.) with the ``loadData`` method, and
   then calling the ``doFit`` method (along with the minimization
   algorithm to use). Or just call the ``fit`` method and supply the
   data image, etc., as part of its input.

-  Once the fit is finished, information about the fit (final χ2 value,
   best-fit paremeter values, etc.) and the best-fitting model image can
   be obtained by querying properties and methods of the ``Imfit``
   object.

See `Sample Usage <./sample_usage.html>`__ for a simple example of how
this works.

The Basics
----------

There are three basic things you can do with PyImfit:

1. Generate model images

2. Fit models to a pre-existing (data) image

3. Generate χ2 or likelihood values from a comparison of model and data
   (e.g., for use with other fitting software, MCMC analysis, etc.)

In **Imfit** (and PyImfit), a “model” consists of one or more *image
functions* from a library built into **Imfit**, sharing one or more
common locations within an image and added together to form a summed
model image. Each image function can generate a 2D image; the final
model image is the sum of its component image functions. Optionally, the
summed model image can then be convolved with a user-supplied
Point-Spread Function (PSF) image to simulate the effects of seeing and
telescope optics. (For greater accuracy, subsections of the image can be
oversampled on a finer pixel scale and convolved with a correspondingly
oversampled PSF image or images; these subsection are then downsampled
back to the native image pixel scale.)

Specify the model (and its parameters)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The model is specified by an instance of the ``ModelDescription`` class.

For the command-line program, this is done via a “configuration” text
file, which has a specific format described in `the Imfit manual
(PDF) <https://www.mpe.mpg.de/~erwin/resources/imfit/imfit_howto.pdf>`__,
or in `this page of the online
docs <https://imfit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config_file_format.html>`__.

If you have a configuration file, you can load it via the convenience
function ``parse_config_file``

::

   model_desc = pyimfit.parse_config_file(configFilePath)

where ``configFilePath`` is a string specifying the path to the
configuration file.

You can also construct a ``ModelDescription`` instance programmatically
from within Python; see below for a very simple example, or `Sample
Usage <./sample_usage.html>`__ for a slightly more complicated example.
Finally, you can create a ``ModelDescription`` instance by calling the
class function ``ModelDescription.dict_to_ModelDescription`` with a
dict-based description of the model; see below for an example.

(You can get a list of the available image functions – “Sersic”,
“Exponential”, etc. – from the package-level variable
``pyimfit.imageFunctionList``, and you can get a list of the parameter
names for each function from ``pyimfit.imageFunctionDict``. These
functions are described in detail in `the Imfit manual
(PDF) <https://www.mpe.mpg.de/~erwin/resources/imfit/imfit_howto.pdf>`__.)

Once you have a ``ModelDescription`` object describing the model, you
can create an instance of the ``Imfit`` class based on the model;
optionally, if you want the model to be convolved with a PSF, you can
also supply the PSF image (in the form of a 2D NumPy array):

::

   imfitter = pyimfit.Imfit(model_desc)
   imfitter = pyimfit.Imfit(model_desc, psfImage)

Creating a model; setting parameter values and limits
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Important Note on Pixel Conventions:** PyImfit uses the same
FITS/IRAF/SAOimage convention for pixel coordinates, where the first
coordinate is the column number and the second is the row number and
indexing is 1-based (i.e., the center of the lower-left pixel in an
image is at x,y = 1.0,1.0). This is *different from* the default
Python/NumPy (column-major, 0-based) convention; see
`here <./pixel_conventions.html>`__ for more details.

Each image-function parameter within a model can have a “current” value
(e.g., the initial guess for the fitting process, the result from the
fit, etc.) and either: a set of lower and upper limits for possible
values **or** the string “fixed”, which means the parameter value should
be kept constant during fits.

**Note**: Unless otherwise specified, all size values are in pixels, and
all intensity/surface-brightness values are in counts/pixel.
(Photometric zero points are not needed except for the optional case of
computing model magnitudes; see below.)

A very simple example of programmatically constructing a model:

::

   model_desc = pyimfit.SimpleModelDescription()
   # define the limits on the central-coordinate X0 and Y0 
   # as +/-10 pixels relative to initial values
   # (note that Imfit treats image coordinates using the 
   # FITS/IRAF/Fortran 1-based numbering scheme: the lower-left
   # pixel in the image has coordinates (x,y) = (1,1))
   model_desc.x0.setValue(105, [95,115])
   model_desc.y0.setValue(62, [52,72])

   # create an Exponential image function, then define the parameter initial values and limits
   disk = pyimfit.make_imfit_function("Exponential", label="disk")
   # set initial values, lower and upper limits for central surface brightness I_0, scale length h;
   # specify that ellipticity is to remain fixed
   disk.I_0.setValue(100.0, [0.0, 500.0])
   disk.h.setValue(25, [10,50])
   disk.PA.setValue(40, [0, 180])
   disk.ell.setValue(0.5, fixed=True)

   model_desc.addFunction(disk)

   print(model_desc)
   X0      105.0       95.0,115.0
   Y0      62.0        52.0,72.0
   FUNCTION Exponential   # LABEL disk
   PA      40.0        0.0,100.0
   ell     0.5     fixed
   I_0     100.0       0.0,500.0
   h       25.0        10.0,50.0

Constructing the same model using Python dicts:

::

   # for each function, set up a dict mapping parameter names to lists of values and (optional) limits;
   # (e.g., the 'PA' parameter for the Exponential function has an initial value of 40 and lower and upper 
   # limits of 0 and 100, while the 'ell' parameter has an initial value of 0.5 and will be held fixed
   # during the fit);
   # then make a dict for that function
   exponentialParamsDict = {'PA': [40, 0,100], 'ell': [0.5, "fixed"], 'I_0': [100.0, 0.0,500.0], 'h': [25, 10,50]}
   exponentialDict = {'name': "Exponential", 'label': "disk", 'parameters': exponentialParamsDict}

   # make one or more function-set dicts
   functionSetDict = {'X0': [105, 95,115], 'Y0': [62, 52,72], 'function_list': [exponentialDict]}

   # finally, make the dict describing the model and instantiate a ModelDescription object from it
   modelDict = {'function_sets': [functionSetDict]}
   model_desc = pyimfit.ModelDescription.dict_to_ModelDescription(modelDict)

   print(model_desc)
   X0      105.0       95.0,115.0
   Y0      62.0        52.0,72.0
   FUNCTION Exponential   # LABEL disk
   PA      40.0        0.0,100.0
   ell     0.5     fixed
   I_0     100.0       0.0,500.0
   h       25.0        10.0,50.0

Fit a model to the data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Specify the data (and optional mask) image
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The data image must be a 2D NumPy array (internally, it will be
converted to double-precision floating point with native byte order, if
it isn’t already).

You pass in the data image to the previously generated ``Imfit`` object
(``imfitter``) using the latter’s ``loadData`` method:

::

   imfitter.loadData(data_im)

You can also specify a mask image, which should be a NumPy integer or
float array where values = 0 indicate *good* pixels, and values > 0
indicate bad pixels that should not be used in the fit. Alternatively,
if the data array is a NumPy MaskedArray, then *its* mask will be used.
(If the data array is a MaskedArray *and* you supply a separate mask
image, then the final mask will be the composition of the data array’s
mask and the mask image.)

::

   imfitter.loadData(data_im, mask=mask_im)

Image-description parameters, statistical models and fit statistics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When calling the ``loadData`` method, you can tell the ``Imfit`` object
about the statistical model you want to use: what the assumed
uncertainties are for the data values, and what “fit statistic” is to be
minimized during the fitting process.

-  χ2 with data-based errors (default): the default is a standard χ2
   approach using per-pixel Gaussian errors, with the assumption that
   the errors (sigma values) can be approximated by the square root of
   the data values.

-  χ2 with model-based errors: Alternately, you can specify
   *model-based* errors, where the sigma values are the square root of
   the *model* values (these are automatically recomputed for every
   iteration of the fitting process).

-  χ2 with user-supplied errors: You can also supply a noise/error array
   which is the same size as the data array and holds per-pixel sigma or
   variance values precomputed in some fashion (e.g., from an
   image-reduction pipeline).

-  Poisson-based (“Poisson Maximum-Likelihood-Ratio” = “PMLR”): Finally,
   you can specify that individual pixel errors come from the model
   assuming a true Poisson process (rather than the Gaussian
   approximation to Poisson statistics that’s used in the χ2
   approaches). This is particularly appropriate when individual pixel
   values of the data are low.

You can also tell the ``Imfit`` object useful things about the data
values: what A/D gain conversion was applied, any Gaussian read noise,
any constant background value that was previously subtracted from the
data image, etc. (You do not need to do this if you are supplying your
own noise/errror array.)

Whatever you chose, you can specify this as part of the call to
``loadData``, e.g.

::

   # default chi^2, assuming an A/D gain of 4.5 e-/ADU and Gaussian read noise with sigma^2 = 0.7 e-
   imfitter.loadData(data_im, gain=4.5, read_noise=0.7)

   # chi^2 with model-based errors
   imfitter.loadData(data_im, gain=4.5, read_noise=0.7, use_model_for_errors=True)

   # chi^2 with a NumPy variance array `variances_im` (gain and read noise are not needed)
   imfitter.loadData(data_im, error=variances_im, error_type="variance")

   # Poisson Maximum-Likelihood-Ratio statistics (read noise is not used in this mode)
   imfitter.loadData(data_im, gain=4.5, use_poisson_mlr=True)

Performing the Fit
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To actually perform the fit, you call the ``doFit`` method on the
``Imfit`` object. You can specify which of the three different
minimization algorithms you want to use with the ``solver`` keyword; the
default is “LM” for the Levenberg-Marquardt minimizer.

-  “LM” = Levenberg-Marquardt (the default): this is a fast,
   gradient-descent-based minimizer.

-  “NM” = Nelder-Mead Simplex: slower, possibly less likely to be
   trapped in local minimum of the fit landscape.

-  “DE” = Differential Evolution: genetic-algorithm-based; very slow;
   probably least likely to be trapped in local minima. (This method
   ignores the initial parameter guesses, instead choosing random values
   selected from within the lower and upper parameter bounds.)

E.g.,

::

   # default Levenberg-Marquardt fit
   result = imfitter.doFit()

   # fit using Nelder-Mead simplex
   result = imfitter.doFit(solver='NM')

**Feedback from the fit:** By default, the ``Imfit`` object is silent
during the fitting process. If you want to see feedback, you can set the
``verbose`` keyword of the ``doFit()`` method: ``verbose=1`` will print
out periodic updates of the current fit statistic (e.g., χ2;
``verbose=2`` will also print the current best-fit parameter values of
the model each time it prints the current fit statistic.

**WARNING:** Currently, there is no way to interrupt a fit once it has
started! (Other than killing the underlying Python process, that is.
This may change in the future.)

Shortcut: Load data and do the fit in one step
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A shortcut is to call the ``fit`` method on the ``Imfit`` object. This
lets you supply the data image (along with the optional mask), specify
the statistical model (χ2, etc.) and (optionally) the minimization
algorithm and verbosity, and start the fit all in one go

::

   result = imfitter.fit(data_im, gain=4.5, use_poisson_mlr=True, solver="NM", verbose=1)

Inspecting the results of a fit
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Imfit object returns an instance of the ``FitResult`` class, which
is closely based on the ``OptimizeResult`` class of ``scipy.optimize``
and is basically a Python dict with attribute access

There are three or four basic things you might want to look at in the
``FitResult`` object when the fit finishes. You can get these things
from the ``FitResult`` object that’s returned from the ``doFit()``
method, or by querying the Imfit object; the examples below show each
possibility.

1. See if the fit actually converged (either ``True`` or ``False``):

   ::

        result.fitConverged
        imfitter.fitConverged

2. See the value of the final fit statistic, and related values:

   ::

        result.fitStat   # final chi^2 or PMLR value
        result.reducedFitStat   # reduced version of same
        result.aic   # corresponding Akaike Information Criterion value
        result.bic   # corresponding Bayesian Information Criterion value

        imfitter.fitStatistic
        imfitter.reducedFitStatistic
        imfitter.AIC
        imfitter.BIC

3.A. Get the best-fit parameter values in the form of a 1D NumPy array:

::

           bestfit_parameters = result.params
           bestfit_parameters = imfitter.getRawParameters()

3.B. Get the 1-sigma uncertainties on the best-fit parameter values in
the form of a 1D NumPy array. Note that these are only produced if the
default Levenberg-Marquardt solver was used, and are fairly crude
estimates that should be used with caution. A somewhat better approach
might be to do `bootstrap resampling <./bootstrap.html>`__, or even `use
a Markov Chain Monte Carlo code such as
“emcee” <./pyimfit_emcee.html>`__.

::

           bestfit_parameters_errs = results.paramErrs
           bestfit_parameters_errs = imfit_fitter.getParameterErrors()

4. You can also see all the fit information at once, in a compact form,
   by simply printing the ``FitResult`` object:

   ::

        print(results)

        aic: 10460466.651003554
        bic: 10460566.640878275
        fitConverged: True
        fitStat: 10460444.646974497
        fitStatReduced: 159.64051349827542
        nFuncEvals: 399
        nIter: 34
        paramErrs: array([0.01109552, 0.01360443, 0.09126936, 0.00065235, 0.00091312, 0.10136475, 0.0384935 , 0.21932252, 0.00158444, 0.,0.01976693])
        params: array([1.28592487e+02, 1.29090431e+02, 2.13445827e+01, 2.21679174e-01, 2.05974929e-01, 3.17125548e+01, 4.19478455e+01, 1.88509744e+01, 2.34454487e-01, 5.00000000e+02, 9.75043337e+00])
        solverName: 'LM'

Note that the ``nIter`` value only has meaning for the
Levenberg-Marquardt solver.

Other things you might be interested in:

1. Get the best-fitting model image (a 2D NumPy array)

   ::

         bestfit_model_im = imfitter.getModelImage()

2. Get fluxes and magnitudes for the best-fitting model – note that what
   is returned is a tuple of the total flux/magnitude and a NumPy array
   of the fluxes/magnitudes for the individual components of the model
   (in the order they are listed in the model):

   ::

         # get the total flux (counts or whatever the pixel values are) and the
         # individual-component fluxes
         (totalFlux, componentFluxes) = imfitter.getModelFluxes()

         # get total and individual-component magnitudes, if you know the zero point
         # for your image (25.72 in this example)
         (totalMag, componentMagnitudes) = imfitter.getModelMagnitudes(zeroPoint=25.72)

Of course, you might also want to inspect the residuals of the fit;
since your data image and the output best-fit model image are both NumPy
arrays, this is simple enough:

::

   residual_im = data_im - bestfit_model_im

Getting the model description
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There are two ways to get a copy of the current model description (which
will include the current best-fit parameter values if a successful fit
was performed, though it will *not* include parameter error estimates).
The first returns a ``ModelDescription`` object; the second returns a
dict containing information about the model (which may be simpler to
inspect). The dict format can then be used with
``pyimfit.ModelDescription.dict_to_ModelDescription()`` to generate a
new ModelObject instance.

::

   model_desc = imfitter.getModelDescription()

   model_dict = imfitter.getModelAsDict()

Generate a model image (without fitting)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sometimes you may want to generate model images without fitting any
data. In this case, you can call the ``getModelImage`` method on the
``Imfit`` object without running the fit.

::

   model_im = imfitter.getModelImage(shape=image_shape)

where ``image_shape`` is a 2-element integer tuple defining the image
shape in the usual NumPy fashion (i.e., an image with n_rows and
n_colums has shape=(n_columns, n_rows)).

If the ``Imfit`` object (``imfitter``) already has a data image assigned
to it, then the output image will have the same dimensions as the data
image, and you do not need to specify the shape.

Note that by default this will generate a model image using the current
parameter values of the model (the initial values, if no fit has been
done, or the best-fit values if a fit *has* been done). You can specify
that a *different* set of parameter values (in the form of a 1-D NumPy
array of the correct length) should be used to compute the model via the
``newParameters`` keyword:

::

   model_im = imfitter.getModelImage(newParameters=parameter_array)
